<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>London. A street.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard, Duke of Gloucester</b>, solus.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now is the winter of our discontent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made glorious summer by this sun of York;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the clouds that lour’d upon our house</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grim-visaged war hath smooth’d his wrinkled front;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now, instead of mounting barbed steeds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He capers nimbly in a lady’s chamber</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, that am rudely stamp’d, and want love’s majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, that am curtail’d of this fair proportion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deform’d, unfinish’d, sent before my time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into this breathing world, scarce half made up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that so lamely and unfashionable</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That dogs bark at me as I halt by them;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have no delight to pass away the time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless to spy my shadow in the sun</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And descant on mine own deformity:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To entertain these fair well-spoken days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am determined to prove a villain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hate the idle pleasures of these days.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By drunken prophecies, libels and dreams,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To set my brother Clarence and the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In deadly hate the one against the other:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if King Edward be as true and just</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I am subtle, false and treacherous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day should Clarence closely be mew’d up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>About a prophecy, which says that <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">g</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Edward’s heirs the murderer shall be.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dive, thoughts, down to my soul: here Clarence comes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</b>, guarded, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Brother, good day: what means this armed guard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That waits upon your grace?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>His majesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tendering my person’s safety, hath appointed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This conduct to convey me to the Tower.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Upon what cause?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>Because my name is George.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He should, for that, commit your godfathers:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, belike his majesty hath some intent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you shall be new-christen’d in the Tower.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But what’s the matter, Clarence? may I know?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yea, Richard, when I know; for I protest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As yet I do not: but, as I can learn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He hearkens after prophecies and dreams;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from the cross-row plucks the letter <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">g</i>,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And says a wizard told him that by <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">g</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>His issue disinherited should be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for my name of George begins with <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">g</i>,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It follows in his thought that I am he.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These, as I learn, and such like toys as these</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have moved his highness to commit me now.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, this it is, when men are ruled by women:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, ’tis she</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That tempers him to this extremity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was it not she and that good man of worship,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Anthony Woodville, her brother there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From whence this present day he is deliver’d?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By heaven, I think there’s no man is secure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But the queen’s kindred and night-walking heralds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heard ye not what an humble suppliant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord hastings was to her for his delivery?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Humbly complaining to her deity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Got my lord chamberlain his liberty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll tell you what; I think it is our way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If we will keep in favour with the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be her men and wear her livery:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The jealous o’erworn widow and herself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since that our brother dubb’d them gentlewomen.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are mighty gossips in this monarchy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I beseech your graces both to pardon me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His majesty hath straitly given in charge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That no man shall have private conference,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of what degree soever, with his brother.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Even so; an’t please your worship, Brakenbury,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may partake of any thing we say:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We speak no treason, man: we say the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We say that Shore’s wife hath a pretty foot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that the queen’s kindred are made gentlefolks:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How say you sir? Can you deny all this?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td>With this, my lord, myself have nought to do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Naught to do with Mistress Shore! I tell thee, fellow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He that doth naught with her, excepting one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were best he do it secretly, alone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td>What one, my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Her husband, knave: wouldst thou betray me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forbear your conference with the noble duke.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We are the queen’s abjects, and must obey.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brother, farewell: I will unto the king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And whatsoever you will employ me in,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were it to call King Edward’s widow sister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will perform it to enfranchise you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Touches me deeper than you can imagine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>I know it pleaseth neither of us well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, your imprisonment shall not be long;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will deliver you, or else lie for you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meantime, have patience.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>I must perforce. Farewell. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</b>, and Guard.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, tread the path that thou shalt ne’er return,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Simple, plain Clarence! I do love thee so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If heaven will take the present at our hands.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But who comes here? the new-deliver’d Hastings?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Hastings</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hastings</td>
							<td>Good time of day unto my gracious lord!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As much unto my good lord chamberlain!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well are you welcome to the open air.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How hath your lordship brook’d imprisonment?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hastings</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That were the cause of my imprisonment.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For they that were your enemies are his,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And have prevail’d as much on him as you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hastings</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>More pity that the eagle should be mew’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While kites and buzzards prey at liberty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>What news abroad?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hastings</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No news so bad abroad as this at home;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king is sickly, weak and melancholy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And his physicians fear him mightily.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, by Saint Paul, this news is bad indeed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, he hath kept an evil diet long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And overmuch consumed his royal person:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis very grievous to be thought upon.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, is he in his bed?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hastings</td>
							<td>He is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go you before, and I will follow you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hastings</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>He cannot live, I hope; and must not die</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till George be pack’d with post-horse up to heaven.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll in, to urge his hatred more to Clarence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With lies well steel’d with weighty arguments;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if I fall not in my deep intent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clarence hath not another day to live:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And leave the world for me to bustle in!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For then I’ll marry Warwick’s youngest daughter.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What though I kill’d her husband and her father?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The readiest way to make the wench amends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is to become her husband and her father:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The which will I; not all so much for love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As for another secret close intent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By marrying her which I must reach unto.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But yet I run before my horse to market:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When they are gone, then must I count my gains. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same. Another street.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the corpse of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry the Sixth</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentlemen</b> with halberds to guard it; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Anne</b> being the mourner.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Set down, set down your honourable load,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If honour may be shrouded in a hearse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Poor key-cold figure of a holy king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughter’d son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stabb’d by the selfsame hand that made these wounds!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cursed be the hand that made these fatal holes!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cursed be the heart that had the heart to do it!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More direful hap betide that hated wretch,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That makes us wretched by the death of thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than I can wish to adders, spiders, toads,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or any creeping venom’d thing that lives!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever he have child, abortive be it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose ugly and unnatural aspect</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May fright the hopeful mother at the view;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that be heir to his unhappiness!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever he have wife, let her be made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As miserable by the death of him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I am made by my poor lord and thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, now towards Chertsey with your holy load,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Taken from Paul’s to be interred there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And still, as you are weary of the weight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry’s corse.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What black magician conjures up this fiend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To stop devoted charitable deeds?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Villains, set down the corse; or, by Saint Paul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll make a corse of him that disobeys.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentleman</td>
							<td>My lord, stand back, and let the coffin pass.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Unmanner’d dog! stand thou, when I command:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Advance thy halberd higher than my breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, by Saint Paul, I’ll strike thee to my foot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, do you tremble? are you all afraid?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas, I blame you not; for you are mortal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hadst but power over his mortal body,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His soul thou canst not have; therefore, be gone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Foul devil, for God’s sake, hence, and trouble us not;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fill’d it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, gentlemen, see, see! dead Henry’s wounds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Open their congeal’d mouths and bleed afresh!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ’tis thy presence that exhales this blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From cold and empty veins, where no blood dwells;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy deed, inhuman and unnatural,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Provokes this deluge most unnatural.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O God, which this blood madest, revenge his death!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O earth, which this blood drink’st revenge his death!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either heaven with lightning strike the murderer dead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or earth, gape open wide and eat him quick,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thou dost swallow up this good king’s blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which his hell-govern’d arm hath butchered!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lady, you know no rules of charity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Villain, thou know’st no law of God nor man:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>But I know none, and therefore am no beast.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>More wonderful, when angels are so angry.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of these supposed evils, to give me leave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By circumstance, but to acquit myself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For these known evils, but to give me leave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By circumstance, to curse thy cursed self.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some patient leisure to excuse myself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No excuse current, but to hang thyself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>By such despair, I should accuse myself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And, by despairing, shouldst thou stand excused;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For doing worthy vengeance on thyself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which didst unworthy slaughter upon others.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Say that I slew them not?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, then they are not dead:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But dead they are, and, devilish slave, by thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>I did not kill your husband.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Why, then he is alive.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Nay, he is dead; and slain by Edward’s hand.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In thy foul throat thou liest: Queen Margaret saw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy murderous falchion smoking in his blood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The which thou once didst bend against her breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that thy brothers beat aside the point.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I was provoked by her slanderous tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which never dreamt on aught but butcheries:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Didst thou not kill this king?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>I grant ye.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dost grant me, hedgehog? then, God grant me too</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>The fitter for the King of heaven, that hath him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he was fitter for that place than earth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>And thou unfit for any place but hell.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Some dungeon.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Your bed-chamber.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>So will it, madam till I lie with you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>I hope so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To leave this keen encounter of our wits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fall somewhat into a slower method,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not the causer of the timeless deaths</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As blameful as the executioner?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Thou art the cause, and most accursed effect.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your beauty was the cause of that effect;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your beauty, which did haunt me in my sleep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To undertake the death of all the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>These eyes could never endure sweet beauty’s wreck;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You should not blemish it, if I stood by:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As all the world is cheered by the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So I by that; it is my day, my life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Black night o’ershade thy day, and death thy life!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>I would I were, to be revenged on thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is a quarrel most unnatural,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be revenged on him that loveth you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is a quarrel just and reasonable,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be revenged on him that slew my husband.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did it to help thee to a better husband.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>His better doth not breathe upon the earth.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>He lives that loves thee better than he could.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Name him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Plantagenet.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Why, that was he.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>The selfsame name, but one of better nature.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Where is he?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Here. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She spitteth at him.</i> Why dost thou spit at me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Never came poison from so sweet a place.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Never hung poison on a fouler toad.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of my sight! thou dost infect my eyes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Would they were basilisks, to strike thee dead!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I would they were, that I might die at once;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For now they kill me with a living death.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shamed their aspect with store of childish drops:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These eyes, which never shed remorseful tear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, when my father York and Edward wept,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Told the sad story of my father’s death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And twenty times made pause to sob and weep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like trees bedash’d with rain: in that sad time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what these sorrows could not thence exhale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I never sued to friend nor enemy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing words;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, now thy beauty is proposed my fee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She looks scornfully at him.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Teach not thy lips such scorn, for they were made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which if thou please to hide in this true bosom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I lay it naked to the deadly stroke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And humbly beg the death upon my knee. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He lays his breast open: she offers at it with his sword.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, do not pause; for I did kill King Henry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But ’twas thy beauty that provoked me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, now dispatch; ’twas I that stabb’d young Edward,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But ’twas thy heavenly face that set me on. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Here she lets fall the sword.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take up the sword again, or take up me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Arise, dissembler: though I wish thy death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not be the executioner.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>I have already.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tush, that was in thy rage:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak it again, and, even with the word,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hand, which, for thy love, did kill thy love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall, for thy love, kill a far truer love;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To both their deaths thou shalt be accessary.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>I would I knew thy heart.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>’Tis figured in my tongue.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>I fear me both are false.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Then never man was true.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Well, well, put up your sword.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Say, then, my peace is made.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>That shall you know hereafter.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>But shall I live in hope?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>All men, I hope, live so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Vouchsafe to wear this ring.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>To take is not to give.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Look, how this ring encompasseth thy finger,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if thy poor devoted suppliant may</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But beg one favour at thy gracious hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>What is it?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That it would please thee leave these sad designs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him that hath more cause to be a mourner,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And presently repair to Crosby Place;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where, after I have solemnly interr’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At Chertsey monastery this noble king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wet his grave with my repentant tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will with all expedient duty see you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For divers unknown reasons, I beseech you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grant me this boon.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>With all my heart; and much it joys me too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see you are become so penitent.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Bid me farewell.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis more than you deserve;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But since you teach me how to flatter you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Imagine I have said farewell already. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Anne</b>, Tressel, and Berkeley.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Sirs, take up the corse.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentleman</td>
							<td>Towards Chertsey, noble lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, to White-Friars; there attend my coming. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all but <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was ever woman in this humour woo’d?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was ever woman in this humour won?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll have her; but I will not keep her long.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What! I, that kill’d her husband and his father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To take her in her heart’s extremest hate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bleeding witness of her hatred by;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Having God, her conscience, and these bars against me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I nothing to back my suit at all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But the plain devil and dissembling looks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet to win her, all the world to nothing!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ha!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath she forgot already that brave prince,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Edward, her lord, whom I, some three months since,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stabb’d in my angry mood at Tewksbury?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Framed in the prodigality of nature,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The spacious world cannot again afford:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will she yet debase her eyes on me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That cropp’d the golden prime of this sweet prince,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And made her widow to a woeful bed?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On me, whose all not equals Edward’s moiety?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On me, that halt and am unshapen thus?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My dukedom to a beggarly denier,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do mistake my person all this while:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself to be a marvellous proper man.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll be at charges for a looking-glass,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And entertain some score or two of tailors,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To study fashions to adorn my body:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since I am crept in favour with myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will maintain it with some little cost.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But first I’ll turn yon fellow in his grave;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then return lamenting to my love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I may see my shadow as I pass. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Rivers</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Grey</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Have patience, madam: there’s no doubt his majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will soon recover his accustom’d health.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Grey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, for God’s sake, entertain good comfort,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cheer his grace with quick and merry words.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td>If he were dead, what would betide of me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td>No other harm but loss of such a lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td>The loss of such a lord includes all harm.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Grey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The heavens have bless’d you with a goodly son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be your comforter when he is gone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Oh, he is young, and his minority</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A man that loves not me, nor none of you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td>Is it concluded that he shall be protector?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is determined, not concluded yet:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But so it must be, if the king miscarry.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Grey</td>
							<td>Here come the lords of Buckingham and Derby.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td>Good time of day unto your royal grace!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>God make your majesty joyful as you have been!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The Countess Richmond, good my Lord of Derby,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To your good prayers will scarcely say amen.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she’s your wife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hate not you for her proud arrogance.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do beseech you, either not believe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The envious slanders of her false accusers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, if she be accused in true report,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bear with her weakness, which, I think, proceeds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From wayward sickness, and no grounded malice.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td>Saw you the king to-day, my Lord of Derby?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But now the Duke of Buckingham and I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are come from visiting his majesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td>What likelihood of his amendment, lords?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td>Madam, good hope; his grace speaks cheerfully.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td>God grant him health! Did you confer with him?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, we did: he desires to make atonement</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Betwixt the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And betwixt them and my lord chamberlain;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sent to warn them to his royal presence.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Would all were well! but that will never be:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fear our happiness is at the highest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hastings</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorset</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They do me wrong, and I will not endure it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who are they that complain unto the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I, forsooth, am stern and love them not?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By holy Paul, they love his grace but lightly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That fill his ears with such dissentious rumours.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because I cannot flatter and speak fair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Smile in men’s faces, smooth, deceive and cog,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must be held a rancorous enemy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thus his simple truth must be abused</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td>To whom in all this presence speaks your grace?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When have I injured thee? when done thee wrong?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or thee? or thee? or any of your faction?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A plague upon you all! His royal person⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom God preserve better than you would wish!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing-while,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king, of his own royal disposition,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not provoked by any suitor else;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which in your outward actions shows itself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against my kindred, brothers, and myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes him to send; that thereby he may gather</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ground of your ill-will, and so remove it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cannot tell: the world is grown so bad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since every Jack became a gentleman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s many a gentle person made a Jack.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, come, we know your meaning, brother Gloucester;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You envy my advancement and my friends’:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God grant we never may have need of you!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Meantime, God grants that we have need of you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your brother is imprison’d by your means,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself disgraced, and the nobility</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Held in contempt; whilst many fair promotions</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are daily given to ennoble those</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That scarce, some two days since, were worth a noble.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By Him that raised me to this careful height</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From that contented hap which I enjoy’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I never did incense his majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An earnest advocate to plead for him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lord, you do me shameful injury,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You may deny that you were not the cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of my Lord Hastings’ late imprisonment.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td>She may, my lord, for⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>She may, Lord Rivers! why, who knows not so?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She may do more, sir, than denying that:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She may help you to many fair preferments,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then deny her aiding hand therein,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lay those honours on your high deserts.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What may she not? She may, yea, marry, may she⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td>What, marry, may she?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, marry, may she! marry with a king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A bachelor, a handsome stripling too:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I wis your grandam had a worser match.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With those gross taunts I often have endured.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I had rather be a country servant-maid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than a great queen, with this condition,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be thus taunted, scorn’d, and baited at:</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</b>, behind.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Small joy have I in being England’s queen.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And lessen’d be that small, God, I beseech thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy honour, state and seat is due to me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What! threat you me with telling of the king?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell him, and spare not: look, what I have said</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will avouch in presence of the king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I dare adventure to be sent to the Tower.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis time to speak; my pains are quite forgot.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Out, devil! I remember them too well:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou slewest my husband Henry in the Tower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Edward, my poor son, at Tewksbury.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ere you were queen, yea, or your husband king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I was a pack-horse in his great affairs;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A weeder-out of his proud adversaries,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A liberal rewarder of his friends:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To royalise his blood I spilt mine own.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>Yea, and much better blood than his or thine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In all which time you and your husband Grey</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were factious for the house of Lancaster;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, Rivers, so were you. Was not your husband</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In Margaret’s battle at Saint Alban’s slain?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me put in your minds, if you forget,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What you have been ere now, and what you are;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Withal, what I have been, and what I am.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>A murderous villain, and so still thou art.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, and forswore himself⁠—which Jesu pardon!⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>Which God revenge!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To fight on Edward’s party for the crown;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for his meed, poor lord, he is mew’d up.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward’s;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or Edward’s soft and pitiful, like mine:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am too childish-foolish for this world.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou cacodemon! there thy kingdom is.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which here you urge to prove us enemies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We follow’d then our lord, our lawful king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So should we you, if you should be our king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If I should be! I had rather be a pedlar:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Far be it from my heart, the thought of it!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As little joy, my lord, as you suppose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You should enjoy, were you this country’s king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As little joy may you suppose in me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A little joy enjoys the queen thereof;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I am she, and altogether joyless.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I can no longer hold me patient. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Advancing.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In sharing that which you have pill’d from me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which of you trembles not that looks on me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not, that, I being queen, you bow like subjects,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O gentle villain, do not turn away!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Foul wrinkled witch, what makest thou in my sight?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But repetition of what thou hast marr’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That will I make before I let thee go.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Wert thou not banished on pain of death?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I was; but I do find more pain in banishment</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than death can yield me here by my abode.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A husband and a son thou owest to me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou a kingdom; all of you allegiance:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sorrow that I have, by right is yours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The curse my noble father laid on thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with thy scorns drew’st rivers from his eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then, to dry them, gavest the duke a clout</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Steep’d in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His curses, then from bitterness of soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Denounced against thee, are all fall’n upon thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td>So just is God, to right the innocent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hastings</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, ’twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the most merciless that e’er was heard of!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td>Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorset</td>
							<td>No man but prophesied revenge for it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td>Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What! were you snarling all before I came,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ready to catch each other by the throat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And turn you all your hatred now on me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did York’s dread curse prevail so much with heaven</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Henry’s death, my lovely Edward’s death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their kingdom’s loss, my woeful banishment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could all but answer for that peevish brat?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not by war, by surfeit die your king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ours by murder, to make him a king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Edward thy son, which now is Prince of Wales,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Edward my son, which was Prince of Wales,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Die in his youth by like untimely violence!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Long mayst thou live to wail thy children’s loss;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And see another, as I see thee now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deck’d in thy rights, as thou art stall’d in mine!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Long die thy happy days before thy death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, after many lengthen’d hours of grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Die neither mother, wife, nor England’s queen!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rivers and Dorset, you were standers by,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was stabb’d with bloody daggers: God, I pray him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That none of you may live your natural age,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But by some unlook’d accident cut off!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Have done thy charm, thou hateful wither’d hag!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And leave out thee? stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If heaven have any grievous plague in store</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then hurl down their indignation</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On thee, the troubler of the poor world’s peace!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless it be whilst some tormenting dream</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou elvish-mark’d, abortive, rooting hog!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou that wast seal’d in thy nativity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The slave of nature and the son of hell!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou slander of thy mother’s heavy womb!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou loathed issue of thy father’s loins!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou rag of honour! thou detested⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Margaret.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>Richard!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Ha!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>I call thee not.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cry thee mercy then, for I had thought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou hadst call’d me all these bitter names.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, so I did; but look’d for no reply.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, let me make the period to my curse!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>’Tis done by me, and ends in “Margaret.”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td>Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why strew’st thou sugar on that bottled spider,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fool, fool! thou whet’st a knife to kill thyself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The time will come when thou shalt wish for me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To help thee curse that poisonous bunch-back’d toad.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hastings</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>Foul shame upon you! you have all moved mine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td>Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To serve me well, you all should do me duty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorset</td>
							<td>Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peace, master marquess, you are malapert:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, that your young nobility could judge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What ’twere to lose it, and be miserable!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They that stand high have many blasts to shake them;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Good counsel, marry: learn it, learn it, marquess.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorset</td>
							<td>It toucheth you, my lord, as much as me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yea, and much more: but I was born so high,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our aery buildeth in the cedar’s top,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And turns the sun to shade; alas! alas!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Witness my son, now in the shade of death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath in eternal darkness folded up.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your aery buildeth in our aery’s nest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O God, that seest it, do not suffer it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As it was won with blood, lost be it so!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td>Have done! for shame, if not for charity.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Urge neither charity nor shame to me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Uncharitably with me have you dealt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shamefully by you my hopes are butcher’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My charity is outrage, life my shame;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in that shame still live my sorrow’s rage!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td>Have done, have done.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O princely Buckingham, I’ll kiss thy hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In sign of league and amity with thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now fair befall thee and thy noble house!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor thou within the compass of my curse.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nor no one here; for curses never pass</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The lips of those that breathe them in the air.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll not believe but they ascend the sky,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there awake God’s gentle-sleeping peace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look, when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His venom tooth will rankle to the death:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have not to do with him, beware of him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all their ministers attend on him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td>Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, but remember this another day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And say poor Margaret was a prophetess!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Live each of you the subjects to his hate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he to yours, and all of you to God’s! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hastings</td>
							<td>My hair doth stand on end to hear her curses.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td>And so doth mine: I muse why she’s at liberty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cannot blame her: by God’s holy mother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She hath had too much wrong; and I repent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My part thereof that I have done to her.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td>I never did her any, to my knowledge.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But you have all the vantage of her wrong.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I was too hot to do somebody good,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is too cold in thinking of it now.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He is frank’d up to fatting for his pains:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God pardon them that are the cause of it!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To pray for them that have done scathe to us.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So do I ever: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">aside</i> being well advised.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Catesby</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Catesby</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, his majesty doth call for you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for your grace; and you, my noble lords.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elizabeth</td>
							<td>Catesby, we come. Lords, will you go with us?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rivers</td>
							<td>Madam, we will attend your grace. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all but <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The secret mischiefs that I set abroach</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I lay unto the grievous charge of others.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clarence, whom I, indeed, have laid in darkness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do beweep to many simple gulls;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Namely, to Hastings, Derby, Buckingham;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And say it is the queen and her allies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That stir the king against the duke my brother.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, they believe it; and withal whet me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be revenged on Rivers, Vaughan, Grey:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But then I sigh; and, with a piece of scripture,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell them that God bids us do good for evil:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thus I clothe my naked villany</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With old odd ends stolen out of holy writ;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And seem a saint, when most I play the devil.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Murderers</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, soft! here come my executioners.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How now, my hardy, stout resolved mates!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are you now going to dispatch this deed?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We are, my lord; and come to have the warrant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we may be admitted where he is.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well thought upon; I have it here about me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives the warrant.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May move your hearts to pity, if you mark him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tush!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fear not, my lord, we will not stand to prate;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Talkers are no good doers: be assured</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We come to use our hands and not our tongues.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your eyes drop millstones, when fools’ eyes drop tears:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I like you, lads; about your business straight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go, go, dispatch.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>We will, my noble lord. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>London. The Tower.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td>Why looks your grace so heavily to-day?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, I have pass’d a miserable night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, as I am a Christian faithful man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would not spend another such a night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though ’twere to buy a world of happy days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So full of dismal terror was the time!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td>What was your dream? I long to hear you tell it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And was embark’d to cross to Burgundy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in my company, my brother Gloucester;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who from my cabin tempted me to walk</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the hatches: thence we look’d toward England,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cited up a thousand fearful times,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>During the wars of York and Lancaster</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That had befall’n us. As we paced along</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methought that Gloucester stumbled; and, in falling,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into the tumbling billows of the main.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord, Lord! methought, what pain it was to drown!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What dreadful noise of waters in mine ears!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What ugly sights of death within mine eyes!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methought I saw a thousand fearful wrecks;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ten thousand men that fishes gnaw’d upon;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All scatter’d in the bottom of the sea:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some lay in dead men’s skulls; and, in those holes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ’twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which woo’d the slimy bottom of the deep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mock’d the dead bones that lay scatter’d by.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Had you such leisure in the time of death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Methought I had; and often did I strive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To yield the ghost: but still the envious flood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kept in my soul, and would not let it forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To seek the empty, vast and wandering air;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But smother’d it within my panting bulk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which almost burst to belch it in the sea.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td>Awaked you not with this sore agony?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, no, my dream was lengthen’d after life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, then began the tempest to my soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who pass’d, methought, the melancholy flood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With that grim ferryman which poets write of,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The first that there did greet my stranger soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who cried aloud, “What scourge for perjury</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so he vanish’d: then came wandering by</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A shadow like an angel, with bright hair</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dabbled in blood; and he squeak’d out aloud,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Clarence is come; false, fleeting, perjured Clarence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That stabb’d me in the field by Tewksbury;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seize on him, Furies, take him to your torments!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Environ’d me about, and howled in mine ears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such hideous cries, that with the very noise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I trembling waked, and for a season after</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could not believe but that I was in hell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such terrible impression made the dream.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No marvel, my lord, though it affrighted you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I promise you, I am afraid to hear you tell it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Brakenbury, I have done those things,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which now bear evidence against my soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Edward’s sake; and see how he requites me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O God! if my deep prayers cannot appease thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet execute thy wrath in me alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I pray thee, gentle keeper, stay by me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will, my lord: God give your grace good rest! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</b> sleeps.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes the night morning, and the noon-tide night.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Princes have but their titles for their glories,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An outward honour for an inward toil;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for unfelt imagination,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They often feel a world of restless cares:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So that, betwixt their tides and low names,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s nothing differs but the outward fame.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Murderers</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Ho! who’s here?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td>In God’s name what are you, and how came you hither?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td>Yea, are you so brief?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>O sir, it is better to be brief than tedious. Shew him our commission; talk no more. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</b> reads it.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am, in this, commanded to deliver</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not reason what is meant hereby,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because I will be guiltless of the meaning.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here are the keys, there sits the duke asleep:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll to the king; and signify to him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thus I have resign’d my charge to you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Do so, it is a point of wisdom: fare you well. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Brakenbury</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>What, shall we stab him as he sleeps?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>No; then he will say ’twas done cowardly, when he wakes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>When he wakes! why, fool, he shall never wake till the judgment-day.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Why, then he will say we stabbed him sleeping.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>The urging of that word “judgment” hath bred a kind of remorse in me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>What, art thou afraid?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>Not to kill him, having a warrant for it; but to be damned for killing him, from which no warrant can defend us.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>I thought thou hadst been resolute.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>So I am, to let him live.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Back to the Duke of Gloucester, tell him so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>I pray thee, stay a while: I hope my holy humour will change; ’twas wont to hold me but while one would tell twenty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>How dost thou feel thyself now?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>’Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Remember our reward, when the deed is done.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>’Zounds, he dies: I had forgot the reward.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Where is thy conscience now?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>In the Duke of Gloucester’s purse.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>So when he opens his purse to give us our reward, thy conscience flies out.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>Let it go; there’s few or none will entertain it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>How if it come to thee again?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>I’ll not meddle with it: it is a dangerous thing: it makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal, but it accuseth him; he cannot swear, but it checks him; he cannot lie with his neighbour’s wife, but it detects him: ’tis a blushing shamefast spirit that mutinies in a man’s bosom; it fills one full of obstacles: it made me once restore a purse of gold that I found; it beggars any man that keeps it: it is turned out of all towns and cities for a dangerous thing; and every man that means to live well endeavours to trust to himself and to live without it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>’Zounds, it is even now at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the duke.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>Take the devil in thy mind, and believe him not: he would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Tut, I am strong-framed, he cannot prevail with me, I warrant thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>Spoke like a tall fellow that respects his reputation. Come, shall we to this gear?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Take him over the costard with the hilts of thy sword, and then we will chop him in the malmsey-butt in the next room.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>O excellent device! make a sop of him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Hark! he stirs: shall I strike?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>No, first let’s reason with him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>Where art thou, keeper? give me a cup of wine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second murderer</td>
							<td>You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>In God’s name, what art thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>A man, as you are.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>But not, as I am, royal.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>Nor you, as we are, loyal.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>My voice is now the king’s, my looks mine own.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your eyes do menace me: why look you pale?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Both</td>
							<td>To, to, to⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>To murder me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Both</td>
							<td>Ay, ay.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Offended us you have not, but the king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>I shall be reconciled to him again.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Are you call’d forth from out a world of men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To slay the innocent? What is my offence?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where are the evidence that do accuse me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What lawful quest have given their verdict up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto the frowning judge? or who pronounced</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bitter sentence of poor Clarence’ death?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before I be convict by course of law,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To threaten me with death is most unlawful.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I charge you, as you hope to have redemption</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By Christ’s dear blood shed for our grievous sins,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you depart and lay no hands on me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The deed you undertake is damnable.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>What we will do, we do upon command.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>And he that hath commanded is the king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Erroneous vassal! the great King of kings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath in the tables of his law commanded</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou shalt do no murder: and wilt thou, then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spurn at his edict and fulfil a man’s?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hurl upon their heads that break his law.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For false forswearing and for murder too:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou didst receive the holy sacrament,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And, like a traitor to the name of God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Didst break that vow; and with thy treacherous blade</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unrip’dst the bowels of thy sovereign’s son.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How canst thou urge God’s dreadful law to us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When thou hast broke it in so dear degree?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Edward, for my brother, for his sake:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, sirs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He sends ye not to murder me for this;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For in this sin he is as deep as I.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If God will be revenged for this deed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, know you yet, he doth it publicly:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take not the quarrel from his powerful arm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He needs no indirect nor lawless course</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cut off those that have offended him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who made thee, then, a bloody minister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>My brother’s love, the devil, and my rage.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thy brother’s love, our duty, and thy fault,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Oh, if you love my brother, hate not me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am his brother, and I love him well.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you be hired for meed, go back again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who shall reward you better for my life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than Edward will for tidings of my death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go you to him from me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Both</td>
							<td>Ay, so we will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tell him, when that our princely father York</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bless’d his three sons with his victorious arm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And charged us from his soul to love each other,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He little thought of this divided friendship:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Ay, millstones; as he lesson’d us to weep.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>O, do not slander him, for he is kind.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As snow in harvest. Thou deceivest thyself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis he that sent us hither now to slaughter thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It cannot be; for when I parted with him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He hugg’d me in his arms, and swore, with sobs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he would labour my delivery.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, so he doth, now he delivers thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From this world’s thraldom to the joys of heaven.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hast thou that holy feeling in thy soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To counsel me to make my peace with God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And art thou yet to thy own soul so blind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou wilt war with God by murdering me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, sirs, consider, he that set you on</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do this deed will hate you for the deed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>What shall we do?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td>Relent, and save your souls.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td>Relent! ’tis cowardly and womanish.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clarence</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which of you, if you were a prince’s son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being pent from liberty, as I am now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If two such murderers as yourselves came to you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would not entreat for life?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come thou on my side, and entreat for me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As you would beg, were you in my distress:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A begging prince what beggar pities not?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td>Look behind you, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Take that, and that: if all this will not do, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">stabs him</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll drown you in the malmsey-butt within. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit, with the body.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A bloody deed, and desperately dispatch’d!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of this most grievous guilty murder done!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reenter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How now! what mean’st thou, that thou help’st me not?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By heavens, the duke shall know how slack thou art!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I would he knew that I had saved his brother!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I repent me that the duke is slain. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Murderer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So do not I: go, coward as thou art.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now must I hide his body in some hole,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Until the duke take order for his burial:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when I have my meed, I must away;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For this will out, and here I must not stay.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
